.Dd August 12, 2021
.Dt SERD-PIPE 1
.Os Serd 0.30.11
.Sh NAME
.Nm serd-pipe
.Nd read and write RDF data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm serd-pipe
.Op Fl ChV
.Op Fl B Ar base
.Op Fl I Ar syntax
.Op Fl O Ar syntax
.Op Fl R Ar root
.Op Fl b Ar bytes
.Op Fl k Ar bytes
.Op Fl o Ar filename
.Op Fl s Ar string
.Ar input ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a fast command-line utility for streaming RDF data.
It reads one or more files and writes the data again,
possibly in a different form.
By default,
the input syntax is guessed from the file extension,
and line-based output is written to standard output.
.Pp
.Nm
writes statements as they are read, in the same order.
It uses very little memory and can process arbitrarily large files,
either directly or as part of a pipeline.
It is useful for things like checking syntax,
converting to a different syntax,
pretty-printing documents,
merging files,
expanding URIs,
and so on.
.Pp
The simplest way to use
.Nm
is by giving files for both input and output.
This way, reasonable options are chosen by default based on the filename.
For example, most common tasks can be accomplished with simple commands like
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -o pretty.ttl input.nt
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 3n
.It Fl B Ar base
Base URI, path, or
.Dq rebase
to use the output path.
This is used to resolve any relative URI references in the input.
.Pp
If the input is a file,
its URI is used as the base by default.
This causes relative references to be written just as they are in the input.
Note, however, that this may not be desired if the output is in a different directory.
For example,
.Li <file.ttl>
would not point to the same file from the new location.
.Pp
The special
.Dq rebase
argument will instead use the output filename set by the
.Fl o
option.
This will write references relative to the output file,
so that parsing it will produce the same absolute URIs as the original input.
For example,
the above may be written as
.Li <../file.ttl>
if the output is written to some sibling directory.
.Pp
Generally, the default is best when copying data along with other bundled files,
while rebase is best for writing data in a new location which still refers to the original paths.
.Pp
These options are intended to make the most common tasks as simple as possible.
An arbitrary base URI can also be given explicitly.
.Pp
.It Fl C
Convert literals to canonical form.
Literals with supported XSD datatypes will be parsed and rewritten canonically.
Invalid literals will cause an error.
All numeric datatypes are supported, as well as
.Vt boolean ,
.Vt duration ,
.Vt datetime ,
.Vt time ,
.Vt hexBinary ,
and
.Vt base64Binary .
.Pp
.It Fl I Ar syntax
Set an input syntax or option.
May be given multiple times.
The case-insensitive
.Ar syntax
can be
.Dq NQuads ,
.Dq NTriples ,
.Dq TriG ,
.Dq Turtle ,
or one of the following options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "QvariablesQ" -compact -offset indent
.It Dq lax
Tolerate invalid input where possible.
Warnings will be printed on syntax errors,
but parsing will attempt to continue.
Note that data may be lost when using this option!
.Pp
.It Dq variables
Support parsing variable nodes.
Variables can be written in SPARQL style, for example
.Dq ?name
or
.Dq $name .
.Pp
.It Dq relative
Read relative URI references exactly without resolving them.
Normally, all relative URIs are expanded against the base URI when reading.
This flag disables that,
so URI references will be passed through exactly as they are in the input.
.Pp
.It Dq global
Assume a clean global namespace for blank node labels,
and do not automatically add prefixes.
Normally,
a prefix like
.Li f1
is added to blank node labels when reading multiple files,
to prevent labels in different files from clashing.
This option disables that,
so blank node labels will be passed through without any added prefix.
Note that this may corrupt the output by merging distinct blank nodes.
.Pp
.It Dq generated
Read seemingly generated blank node labels exactly without adjusting them.
Normally, blank node labels like
.Li b123
are adapted to avoid potential clashes with generated ones.
This flag disables that,
so such labels will be passed through exactly as they are in the input.
Note that this may corrupt the output by merging distinct blank nodes.
.El
.Pp
.It Fl O Ar syntax
Set an output syntax or option.
May be given multiple times.
The case-insensitive
.Ar syntax
can be
.Dq empty ,
.Dq NQuads ,
.Dq NTriples ,
.Dq TriG ,
.Dq Turtle ,
or one of the following options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "QverbatimQ" -compact -offset indent
.It Dq ascii
Escape all non-ASCII characters.
Normally, text is written in UTF-8.
This flag will escape non-ASCII characters in text as Unicode code points like
.Li \eU00B7 or
.Li \eU0001F600 .
.Pp
.It Dq expanded
Write expanded URIs instead of prefixed names.
.Pp
.It Dq verbatim
Write URI references exactly as they are in the input.
This avoids resolving URIs and making them relative to the output base URI.
.Pp
.It Dq terse
Write terser output without newlines.
This can be useful for writing a line-based description of suitably structured data.
.Pp
.It Dq lax
Tolerate invalid UTF-8 by writing the replacement character when necessary.
Note that data may be lost when using this option!
.El
.Pp
The
.Dq empty
syntax suppresses the output,
so that only warnings and errors will be printed.
.Pp
.It Fl R Ar root
Keep relative URIs within a
.Ar root
URI.
This will avoid creating any relative URI references with leading path segments like
.Dq ../
that enter a parent of
.Ar root .
.Pp
For example,
if
.Li /home/you/file.ttl
is written to the file
.Li /home/me/output.ttl
using
.Fl B Li rebase ,
then it will be written as
.Li <../you/file.ttl> .
Setting this option to
.Li /home/me/
would prevent references from
.Dq escaping
like this,
so the above would instead be written as
.Li <file:///home/you/file.ttl> .
.Pp
This is useful for making relocatable
.Dq bundles
of resources,
since it can keep all relative references within the bundle,
while still allowing up-references to be used.
.Pp
.It Fl V
Display version information and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl b Ar bytes
I/O block size.
This is the number of bytes in a file that will be read or written at once.
The default is 4096, which should perform well in most cases.
Note that this only applies to files, standard input and output are always processed one byte at a time.
.Pp
.It Fl h
Print the command line options.
.Pp
.It Fl k Ar bytes
Parser stack size.
For performance and security reasons, parsing is performed with a fixed-size stack.
This option sets a hard limit on the total amount of space used for parsing.
The default is 1 megabyte, which should be more than enough for most data.
This option can be used to reduce memory consumption,
or to enable parsing documents with extremely deep nesting or extremely large literal values.
.Pp
.It Fl o Ar filename
Write output to the given
.Ar filename
instead of stdout.
.Pp
.It Fl s Ar string
Parse
.Ar string
as input.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Error messages and warnings are printed in color by default if the output is a terminal.
This can be controlled by common environment variables:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 14n
.It Ev NO_COLOR
If present (regardless of value), color is disabled.
.It Ev CLICOLOR
If set to 0, color is disabled.
.It Ev CLICOLOR_FORCE
If set to anything other than 0, color is forced on.
.El
.Pp
See
.Lk http://no-color.org/
and
.Lk https://bixense.com/clicolors/
for details.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with a status of 0, or non-zero if an error occured.
.Sh EXAMPLES
To print an NTriples file as Turtle:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -O turtle input.nt
.Pp
To print only errors and discard the output:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -O empty input.ttl
.Pp
To pretty-print a file:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -o pretty.ttl input.ttl
.Pp
To expand all prefixed names into full URIs:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -O expanded -o expanded.ttl input.ttl
.Pp
To merge two files:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -o merged.ttl header.ttl body.ttl
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Bl -item -compact
.It
.Xr serd-filter 1
.It
.Xr serd-sort 1
.It
.Lk http://drobilla.net/software/serd/
.El
.Sh STANDARDS
.Bl -item
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%T RDF 1.1 NQuads
.%D February 2014
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/n-quads/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%D February 2014
.%T RDF 1.1 NTriples
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/n-triples/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%T RDF 1.1 TriG
.%D February 2014
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/trig/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%D February 2014
.%T RDF 1.1 Turtle
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
is a part of serd, by
.An David Robillard
.Mt d@drobilla.net .
