.\" Copyright 2011-2025 David Robillard <d@drobilla.net>
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.Dd August 21, 2025
.Dt SERD-PIPE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm serd-pipe
.Nd read and write RDF data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm serd-pipe
.Op Fl CVh
.Op Fl B Ar base
.Op Fl I Ar syntax
.Op Fl O Ar syntax
.Op Fl R Ar root
.Op Fl b Ar bytes
.Op Fl k Ar bytes
.Op Fl l Ar level
.Op Fl o Ar filename
.Op Fl s Ar string
.Op Ar input ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a fast command-line utility for streaming RDF data.
It reads data in some syntax and writes it in another,
possibly with some transformations applied.
.Pp
.Nm
writes statements immediately as they are read,
so it uses little memory and is suitable for use in pipelines and with huge files.
It is also useful as a quick utility for things like checking syntax,
converting to another,
pretty-printing,
merging files,
canonicalization,
expanding URIs,
and so on.
.Pp
Syntax is guessed from the file extension if possible,
so working with files is most convenient.
For example,
many common tasks can be accomplished with simple commands like:
.Pp
.Dl $ serd-pipe -o pretty.ttl input.nt
.Pp
The
.Ar input
operands are processed in command-line order.
If
.Ar input
is
.Ar -
or absent,
standard input is read.
Similarly, output defaults to standard output.
If syntax isn't given and can't be determined from filenames,
then input is read as TriG and output is written as NQuads
(which will function properly with Turtle and NTriples, respectively).
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Fl B Ar base
Base URI, path, or
.Cm rebase
to use the output path.
This is used to resolve relative URI references in the input.
.Pp
If the input is a file,
its path is used by default,
so relative paths are written as they are in the input.
The special
.Cm rebase
argument will instead use the output path set by the
.Fl o
option,
so paths are written relative to the output file.
.Pp
The distinction matters when reading from bundles of files that refer to each other.
For example,
when copying
.Pa in/manifest.ttl
to
.Pa out/manifest.ttl ,
the relative URI reference
.Li <data.ttl>
is written as
.Li <../in/data.ttl>
when using
.Fl o
.Cm rebase .
.It Fl C
Convert literals to canonical form.
Literals with supported XSD datatypes will be parsed and rewritten canonically.
Invalid literals will cause an error.
All numeric datatypes are supported, as well as
.Vt boolean ,
.Vt duration ,
.Vt datetime ,
.Vt time ,
.Vt hexBinary ,
and
.Vt base64Binary .
.It Fl I Ar syntax
Set an input syntax or option.
May be given multiple times.
The case-insensitive
.Ar syntax
can be
.Cm NQuads ,
.Cm NTriples ,
.Cm TriG ,
.Cm Turtle ,
or an option:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm decoded
Decode unreserved URI characters.
Normally, percent-encoded octets in URIs are read as-is.
This option enables decoding them as UTF-8 so,
for example,
.Ql %7E
is read as
.Ql ~ .
Reserved characters aren't decoded, but their encoding is normalized.
The
.Cm encoded
writer option does the opposite.
.It Cm generated
Read seemingly generated blank node labels exactly.
Normally, blank node labels formatted like generated ones,
like
.Ql b123 ,
are adjusted to avoid clashes.
This option disables that,
so such labels are read as-is.
Note that this may corrupt the output by merging distinct blank nodes!
.It Cm global
Assume a clean global namespace for blank nodes.
Normally,
a prefix like
.Ql f1
is added to blank node labels,
to prevent clashes when reading multiple files.
This option disables that,
so labels are read without any added prefix.
Note that this may corrupt the output by merging distinct blank nodes!
.It Cm lax
Tolerate invalid input where possible.
Warnings are printed for syntax errors,
but parsing will continue if possible.
Note that data may be lost when using this option!
.It Cm ordered
Generate blank node labels with left-padded numbers.
This generates IDs like
.Ql _:b0000000123
that sort in numerical order,
which can be useful to preserve statement ordering.
.It Cm variables
Support parsing variable nodes.
Variables can be written in SPARQL style, for example
.Ql ?var
or
.Ql $var .
.El
.It Fl O Ar syntax
Set an output syntax or option.
May be given multiple times.
The case-insensitive
.Ar syntax
can be
.Cm empty ,
.Cm NQuads ,
.Cm NTriples ,
.Cm TriG ,
.Cm Turtle ,
or an option:
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Cm absolute
Write only absolute URIs.
Normally, URIs are made relative if possible, and relative URI references that can't be resolved are written as-is.
This option disables that, and makes it an error if a URI can't be made absolute.
.It Cm baseless
Suppress writing
.Ql @base
URI directives.
Normally, these are preserved in Turtle or TriG.
This option disables that,
so the output has an implicit base URI.
Note that this may corrupt data that contains relative URIs references and base URI changes!
.It Cm encoded
Write extended URI characters as percent-encoded UTF-8 bytes.
Normally, all URI characters are written as-is.
With this option,
multi-byte and special characters are written with percent-encoding,
so URIs in the output are ASCII-compatible.
The
.Cm decoded
reader option does the opposite.
.It Cm escaped
Escape additional characters like in the Turtle test suite outputs,
for compatibility with older NTriples readers.
This writes
.Ql \eu0008
for backspace,
.Ql \eu000C
for form-feed,
and similar escapes for extended characters in URIs.
.It Cm expanded
Write expanded URIs instead of prefixed names.
Normally, URIs are abbreviated if a suitable namespace prefix is defined.
This option disables that,
so even URIs that could be abbreviated are written in full.
.It Cm lines
Write
.Dq flat
line-based output.
This option disables abbreviation and avoids writing inline blank nodes, lists, and long literals,
so the output has one statement per line.
.It Cm longhand
Disable shorthands for
.Li rdf:type
predicates and unquoted
.Li xsd:boolean ,
.Li xsd:decimal ,
and
.Li xsd:integer
literals.
.It Cm prefixless
Suppress writing namespace
.Ql @prefix
directives.
Normally, these are preserved in Turtle or TriG.
This option disables that,
so the output has implicit namespace prefixes.
Note that this may corrupt data that contains prefixed names!
.It Cm terse
Write terser output with fewer lines.
Normally, statements are written on separate lines, including abbreviated statements, list elements, and so on.
This option enables a terser style which only separates top-level descriptions by line.
Note that this may produce extremely long lines.
.It Cm verbatim
Write URI references and prefixed names exactly as in the input.
Normally, the writer first expands/resolves, then tries to abbreviate the resulting URI.
This option disables that, so prefixed names and URI references are written as-is.
Note that this may produce invalid output!
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm empty
syntax suppresses the output,
so that only warnings and errors will be printed.
The
.Cm absolute ,
.Cm baseless ,
.Cm expanded ,
.Cm lines ,
.Cm longhand ,
and
.Cm prefixless
options are implied for
.Cm NQuads
and
.Cm NTriples .
.It Fl R Ar root
Keep relative URIs within a
.Ar root
URI.
This avoids creating any relative URI references with leading path segments like
.Pa ../
that enter a parent of
.Ar root .
.Pp
For example,
if
.Pa /home/you/file.ttl
is written to the file
.Pa /home/me/output.ttl
using
.Fl B Cm rebase ,
then it will be written as
.Li <../you/file.ttl> .
Setting
.Fl R Pa /home/me/
would prevent references from
.Dq escaping
like this,
so the above would instead be written as
.Li <file:///home/you/file.ttl> .
.Pp
This is useful for keeping relative references within some directory.
.It Fl V
Display version information and exit.
.It Fl b Ar bytes
I/O block size.
This is the number of bytes in a file that will be read or written at once.
The default is 4096, which should perform well in most cases.
Note that this only applies to files, standard input and output are always processed one byte at a time.
.It Fl h
Print the command line options.
.It Fl k Ar bytes
Parser stack size.
The input is parsed into a pre-allocated stack with a fixed maximum size.
By default, this is 512 KiB, which should be enough for most documents.
This can be increased to support unusually deep data,
or decreased to reduce memory requirements and startup time.
.It Fl l Ar level
Maximum log level to display.
The
.Ar level
is as in
.Xr syslog 2 ,
either a number from
.Cm 0
to
.Cm 7,
or
.Cm emerg ,
.Cm alert ,
.Cm crit ,
.Cm err ,
.Cm warn ,
.Cm note ,
.Cm info ,
or
.Cm debug .
.It Fl o Ar filename
Write output to the given
.Ar filename
instead of stdout.
.It Fl s Ar string
Parse
.Ar string
as input.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Errors and warnings are printed in color by default if the output is a terminal.
This can be overridden with environment variables:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width 14n
.It Ev NO_COLOR
If present (regardless of value), color is disabled.
.It Ev CLICOLOR
If set to 0, color is disabled.
.It Ev CLICOLOR_FORCE
If set to anything other than 0, color is forced on.
.El
.Sh FILES
No files are accessed except those given on the command-line.
Filename extensions are significant if no syntax is specified:
.Pa .nq
is used for NQuads,
.Pa .nt
for NTriples,
.Pa .trig
for TriG, and
.Pa .ttl
for Turtle.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with a status of 0, or non-zero if an error occurred.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 3n
.It Format a Turtle file to stdout:
.Nm Fl O
.Ar turtle
.Pa input.ttl
.It Print only errors and discard the output:
.Nm Fl O
.Ar empty
.Pa input.ttl
.It Convert an NTriples file to Turtle:
.Nm Fl o
.Ar output.ttl
.Pa input.nt
.It Expand all prefixed names into full URIs:
.Nm Fl O
.Ar expanded
.Fl o
.Ar expanded.ttl
.Pa input.ttl
.It Merge two files:
.Nm Fl o
.Pa merged.ttl
.Pa header.ttl
.Pa body.ttl
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Bl -item -compact
.It
.Xr serd-filter 1
.It
.Lk http://drobilla.net/software/serd/
.It
.Lk http://gitlab.com/drobilla/serd/
.El
.Sh STANDARDS
.Bl -item
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%T RDF 1.1 NQuads
.%D February 2014
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/n-quads/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%D February 2014
.%T RDF 1.1 NTriples
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/n-triples/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%T RDF 1.1 TriG
.%D February 2014
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/trig/
.It
.Rs
.%A W3C
.%D February 2014
.%T RDF 1.1 Turtle
.Re
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/
.It
.Rs
.%A Jan Niklas Hasse
.%T CLICOLOR
.%D April 2015
.Re
.Lk https://bixense.com/clicolors/
.It
.Rs
.%A Joshua Stein
.%T NO_COLOR
.%D August 2017
.Re
.Lk http://no-color.org/
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
is a part of serd, by
.An David Robillard
.Aq Mt d@drobilla.net .
